special packaging stops moisture and
oxygen getting in so bacteria can't grow
MREs have a shelf life of three years
[Music]
but they're not exactly popular with the
people who have to eat hands-down worst
MRE made is the veggie omelet it's it's
like yeah I don't know just wet soggy
cardboard is the best way I think you
can describe it I would rather not eat
them as much as possible so when the
army went looking for ways to spruce up
the menu it wanted something that was
quick to prepare and packed with
nutrition the solution was a surprise a
sandwich but not any old sandwich this
one is capable of extreme preservation
make a sandwich at home and it's soggy
and stale in no time
the challenge for food scientist
Michelle Richardson was finding a way to
stop that happening
these are sandwiches that were purchased
at the local gas station I'm going to
open up one so you can actually see
what's going on inside they're only
three days old imagine what they'd be
like after three years there's a lot of
moisture migration going on as you can
see this bread is very wet and soggy so
it's not very appetizing and not only
that because the filling has a different
amount of water than the bread what
happens is that the water migrates to
the bread which will result in an
environment that will support the growth
of bacteria bread and water is food and
drink to bacteria if you want a sandwich
that can last for years you've got to
control the moisture content without
water bacteria cannot grow but a dry
sandwich isn't going to cut it with the
troops
so Michelle turn for inspiration - a
traditional way of preserving food Jam
making as you can see it's made from
strawberries and strawberries contain a
lot of moisture it can contain over 95%
moisture but ingredients were added and
what they do is that they bind the water
so that you have a nice moisture texture
with no free water the sugar added to
jam acts as what's called a humectant it
traps the water from the fruit inside
the jam that's why Jam is moist enough
to spread but doesn't make the bread
soggy crucially for the battle against
decay the water is also now locked away
from the bacteria
the army sandwiches deploy a whole range
of ingredients that have these water
retaining properties honey sugar and
salt have all been enlisted but that's
not the only secret to this sandwich to
survive most bacteria also need oxygen
so Michel has come up with a clever way
to remove that too inside here is a
packet containing iron filings any
oxygen inside the packaging will react
with the iron filings and become trapped
in a layer of rust these two simple but
ingenious solutions have combined to
make a sandwich that's resistant to
decay but the ultimate test is whether
anyone wants to eat them that's
definitely the best two-year old
sandwich overhead there's a lot new ones
I've had to know I'm a big fan I like to
bread the bread just makes it it's
definitely great especially two years
old these sandwiches don't stay fresh
forever but if bacteria can be deprived
of the moisture and oxygen they need to
survive decay can be kept at bay for a
very long time
you